John Laudun

Listening for Lives

*The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman*, arguably one of the greatest
works of Louisiana literature, is presented both in the original novel
and in its later film adaptation as a frame tale. The story begins not
with Miss Pittman but with a local teacher who has has long been trying
to get her to tell her story. She relents in the summer of 1962, and the
story, as most of us remember it, begins. Whether you have read the book
or watched the movie, you cannot be helped but be moved by Miss
Pittman's story, and, yet, it's a lie. I have interviewed a lot of
people in my time, some of whom have been considered their community's
historians, and there is one thing I can tell you: none of them told
their story in the seamless, ever-building story arc the way Miss Jane
Pittman does.

That's okay. *The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman* is a novel. Much
of the story it tells feels true because, first, Ernest Gaines was a
brilliant novelist, and, second, because he was committed to telling
stories based on his, and others', experience of life in Louisiana from
a point of view that had largely been left out of the history books
sitting no doubt on the shelves of the novel's schoolhouse.

But no one talks that way. I have interviewed dozens of individuals in
my time, most of them older folks, and many of them very fine
storytellers --- one man held me spellbound for half an hour recounting
the time he took his outboard motor to get repaired --- but none of them
ever told me their life story from beginning to end in a way that built
a clear and cogent narrative.[^1] Which makes perfect sense because none
of them, none of us, are characters in novels.

Their lives, our lives, are richer, more complicated, more nuanced, more
contradictory, and generally less obviously meaningful than fictional
characters. But we also get to determine our own fates in a way that
fictional characters do not, and, despite the fact that I am not as free
to choose my fate -- history is sticky after all, I am generally
happier living my life, as my teenaged daughter might describe it, in an
open world game as opposed to a rail shooter. (For those with furrowed
brows, a rail shooter game is a lot like a novel: characters do not have
a choice in what comes next. You as a player only get to decide which
way to look and/or point your gun. Exciting, perhaps, but very limited.)

So *The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman* does not represent life as
it actually happens, nor people as they actually tell stories. It's a
novel. The problem isn't the genre, but rather our expectations on what
happens in the real world based on what, and how, we encounter things in
fictional worlds. The stories in novels and films are amazing: one event
leads to another, and then to another, until we reach an evident, or
unexpected, conclusion (again, depending on the genre).

Not only do our lives not happen like that, but the stories we tell do
not work like that, and we do not necessarily string them together into
meaningful chronological sequences that build to a seamless view of our
lives. (We might try, but there's always some slippage!) Having been
raised on super-cogent fictions, however, we are disappointed in
ourselves and in others when we cannot tell stories the way they happen
in books and movies. Not only do our lives pale in comparison, but even
our ways of telling, our ways of making meaning, seemingly pale as well.

In some ways, this disparity between what we think we should do and how
we should report it to others makes our lives easier: we don't need to
try; we don't need to tell; and we don't need to listen. My reason for
joining you today is to change your expectations, to open your eyes (and
ears) to how we actually talk, to the stories (and other kinds of
things) we actually tell, and to make it possible for you, your staff,
and the families you serve to allow the older people in their lives just
to talk.

If I have learned anything in 30 years of being a folklorist, listening
is itself a gift. Listening, actually listening, doing nothing but
listening, honest to goodness listening for more than twenty minutes
changes relationships. I have watched countless individuals, from
students coming to talk with me in my office to ordinary people who have
honored me with a cup of coffee in their kitchen suddenly relax, open,
and bloom when they realized that someone was actually listening to
them, not simply waiting for their turn to talk.

To sum up our brief journey so far and map out the territory ahead, let
me note a few things. First, no one tells a life story from beginning to
end. That kind of thing doesn't even happen in novels. If you look more
carefully at most large narratives, they are build up of a series of
smaller narratives. Moreover, not all stories are the same: they come in
a variety of shapes and sizes --- and given the limitations on our time,
they come at various moments.

In fact, how stories come to be told is an interesting feature that few
people --- outside of folklorists, anthropologists, and linguists
--- think about. Few of us sit down just to tell stories from our lives.
Even when we sit down with a beloved elder, we often ask them about a
particular topic or event: "Tell me about the time you were stranded in
the house" or "What did you do during...?" In other words, there are
almost always prompts. Even when they are not explicit, prompts are
present: a grandmother wishes to convey to a grandson how to be patient
when trying to learn something. A father tells his daughter what it was
like when he first moved away from home. If we think of stories as one
way to communicate knowledge, then life stories make even less sense:
knowledge about a particular person isn't really knowledge, but the
knowledge to be drawn from what they experienced is.

So stories come in all kinds of shapes and sizes: from small
recollections about what the courthouse square used to look like; to
personal anecdotes about growing up along the bayou; to brief accounts
of a local organization; to legends about a town. These are all things
we tell, and, in the case of the courthouse square, they need not even
be narratives: they are probably more descriptive than anything else,
acting like establishing shots in movies. Sometimes that is all a person
has to offer us: a cinematic tour of the past that gives us some sense
of what it was like to be there. It is often so tangible that it feels
like a story.

This last point is an important one: we do not simply tell each other
stories. We also describe things to each other. We inform each other
about important ideas or topics. We report events to each other. And, as
anyone at an any social gathering can attest, we argue with each other.
Each of these things organizes sequences of words and ideas differently.
If, for example, a story communicates through a unique sequence of
events, then an argument communicates through a logical sequence of
ideas.

Our everyday discourse is a mix of all these kinds of sequences. Life is
far too interesting to be contained within only way of stringing words
together, let alone within words themselves. (If we could put everything
into words, we would have no reason to gesture, to move, to draw, to
build. Words are not enough.)

This is the way we talk. We have always talked this way. If we accept
this, then we can begin to listen not for what we think we should hear
but for what people actually have to say.

## The Past Is Always Told in the Present

Let's listen then to Elizabeth Bridgwaters. I was first introduced to
Mrs. Bridgwaters when someone walked me to where she sat on her porch,
with her portable telephone and the daily paper spread out before her,
as was her custom, surrounded by geraniums. Mrs. Bridgwaters had been a
school dietitian and a preacher in the AME church. The mother of nine,
she was also the first black person elected to office in Bloomington,
Indiana. I got to spend time with her while I was doing work on folk
history because every member of the black community I met had the same
suggestion: "Maybe you should talk to Mrs. Bridgwaters?"

One of my first conversations with her was shortly after she and others
from the West Side neighborhood had met with the mayor of Bloomington
over a proposal to house an after-school program for troubled teens in
the neighborhood's community center, something which hinted of dumping
to area residents. Mrs. Bridgwaters saw the proposal as yet another
instance of city officials not understanding and appreciating the
history of the neighborhood. Her frustration with city officials and
desire to set the record straight affected our conversation in several
ways. A number of witnesses to the meeting that city officials called to
explain themselves and the proposal told me that Mrs. Bridgwaters had,
as she later told me in her own words, told the mayor and his
lieutenants, that "they didn't know a damn thing about the Westside and
they never will."

What they did not know, or at least were not sensitive to, she told me,
was the black community's sense of always being at the mercy of a city
that moved it around or forced things upon it that it did not need or
want. In the particular case of the Banneker Center, area residents had
worked hard to make it an effective community center only to see the
center get saddled with a conventional city bureaucracy. It would, Mrs.
Bridgwaters asserted, do the city well to remember the history of the
West Side neighborhood. As she noted to me, the center had once been the
school for African Americans and had after some years of decline been
converted into a community center mostly through neighborhood
initiative. She explained the school's significance to me in the
following fashion:

> It's interesting you know.  
> When I was a little girl  
> most black people lived on the east side of town.  
> But some black people lived over here.  
> But they didn't want us over there.  
> So they built a school over here. 

Bridgwaters' statement has been broken into lines by clause, allowing us
to pay better attention not only to the language she uses but also how
she uses it. Composed almost like a poem, the 41 words here do two
things which, in effect, re-create the dislocation of the black
community from one place to another. In the first instance, she begins
with a reference schema we are all used to in conversation: I, you, and
everybody else (*them*). The first four lines establish that there is
Mrs. Bridgwaters, the *I*; me, the *you*; and then the black community,
usually *them*. But when *they* appears, it is not black people but the
people who move black people around. And if we aren't clear that this is
about displacing black people, look at the ending of the last four
lines: there's the "east side of town" (which is *there*), then *here*,
then *there*, then *here*. Pushed and pulled verbally, we experience the
same thing Bloomington's black community has experienced for decades.

Those 41 words have to be some of the best expository or argumentative
prose ever spoken. But one thing they are not, is narrative. There's no
story there. In fact, Mrs. Bridgwaters is very careful to remove the
little girl who might humanize the chronology and make it into a story,
that might entail a moment like "I remember the day..." No, Mrs.
Bridgwaters is not interested in the story: she is interested in the
argument, and she makes it effectively and forcefully in 41 words.

Why does this matter? What can we learn from moments like this? The
first is that all talk occurs in moments: people talk about the past do
so from the vantage point of the present, and not any present but the
particular present of the conversation being had. Our brains are immense
store houses of memories, but our recall mechanisms vary widely not only
from person to person but also from moment to moment for each person. A
word or phrase. A sound. A smell. A sight. All of these things prompt
memories to be available for recall --- and just because we are talking
about a particular historical moment doesn't mean that all memories
associated with it will be recalled. Almost assuredly, some recalled
memories will obscure others, as if in spotlighting one thing in our
minds other things are cast into darkness.

Context matters, and sometimes in surprising ways. I have had students
sit down to interview parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, and others
about a variety of topics. Sometimes they are successful; sometimes they
are not. I have also had students go collect recipes from those same
people and instructed them to turn the recorder on as a way to make
collecting the recipe easier. It never fails but the conversation
expands to more than the dish being cooked. Fathers and mothers recall
being taught by their fathers and mothers, and they recall that time
grandma left the pot of oil on the stove too long or the time grandpa
decided to make the fire start faster using gasoline. Whew. So many
mistakes, but also great stories.

(E.g., Katie in the kitchen with her grandmother who, it turns out was a
Rosie the riveter.) Don't set out to talk with someone. Do something
with them and let the stories come out of the situation.

As occupants of the present, we should never lose sight of the fact that
all of us create the future out of the past. Each and everyone one of us
has a future, until that moment we don't, and we recall the past we need
to recall in order to occupy the present and prepare ourselves for the
future.

## The Past Isn't Always a Sequence of Events

A second point is not all talk about the past is a story. Sometimes
there are, as we will see in a moment, just descriptions or reports or,
as was the case with Mrs. Bridgwaters, arguments. A graduate student of
mine, Cheramie Richard, used to sit and listen to her father and his
friends argue about the boundaries of a community in which they had
grown up outside of Iota, Louisiana, a community which no longer
existed, except in their arguments over who lived, or did not live, in
Shortbread proper. Cheramie set out to locate the town, but as she dug
deeper and deeper she realized that the town's actual existence paled in
comparison to the community of talkers it drew together to argue about
it. She ended up writing an entire master's thesis about how the talkers
created a community in the present by talking about a community in the
past.

I have encountered similar kinds of talk repeatedly over the years of
interviewing people sometimes about the past in general but usually
about a particular moment in the past. In the case of a murder that had
taken place in a small midwestern town, I found myself sitting in Jack
Morrison's kitchen one day, asking him to tell me about that moment in
time. Jack had been a teenager when events had unfolded and had, as was
his nature, a kind of good-natured version of events. But a lot of his
recall were scenes like the following which reported on what the
courthouse square looked like on Saturdays:

And you didn't hardly ever go downtown, except on Saturday or maybe
Friday night.

And that was basically to do some dry goods shopping, but primarily it
was for visitation purposes.

People would gather round the old square and sit on the fenders of the
old cars and they'd chit-chat for an hour.

Many of us can picture the scene in our mind's eye: older folks sitting
on or standing around cars, younger people circulating around, children
playing within eye's reach of their parents. Everyone out seeing who
else is out and being seen themselves. (It reminds me of the miracle
mile that runs from the MacDonald's to the Sonic in Franklin,
Louisiana---still running so far as I know.)

As vivid as the scene is, and the longer version of this quote brings
out even more detail, what it is not is a narrative. Nothing happens. We
are told what people typically did. We see them arrayed around the
square. It's like we are watching a movie in which the camera roves
around and shows us a variety of things, what filmmakers sometimes refer
to as "an establishing shot." What it is establishing, for them, is the
situation within which events will arise and unfold, a moment in which a
narrative will be told. There isn't any story yet, but we are being
prepared for it. What Jack Morris is doing is *describing*.

Description of the past happens more often than most historians care to
admit. In fact, even historians who work with archival material have to
admit that much of what they deal with describes situations, counts
heads of cattle on a farmstead or people in a household. From that, the
historian crafts a narrative. But the counts matter to the people who do
them and often the information we exchange in the present or about the
past is descriptive. Here's another account from Jack Morris:

And, uh, there was another little guy down the street that had his own
family pastry shop.

And it was, uh, BJ's bakery or EJ's bakery, never will forget it.

Just a little bitty place, bout half the size of this right here
(indicates the kitchen where we are sitting).

And he had a couple of deep fryers back there.

He never impressed me as being real clean, but he had *goo-od* donuts.

(Please note that I am leaving everything in for the purpose of
transcriptions: part of my goal is to create realistic expectations
about how people talk. We start. We stop. We hem and haw. We have false
starts. We back up and go around. This is how we talk!)

Again, the vividness is apparent, but it's a description and not a
narrative. If you want to try this out for yourself, ask an older person
how to get some place. You know where the sugar mill used to be? Well,
you make a left there. You go past where Guidrozes used to have a
house...

# The Past Is Bigger than We Think

Finally, sometimes the past just isn't. I don't mean the past isn't what
it used to be, but rather the past never took place, at least not the
way you think the past *should* have taken place. By now, you are
getting the impression that a lot of what I am arguing against is our
own expectations about the past and how people talk about it. And I base
that on spending a lot of time, out in the world, talking to people
about the past. Over a quarter century of asking people to talk about
the past, and dozens of hours of recordings and hundreds of hours,
perhaps thousands of hours, of time spent in kitchens, living rooms,
dens, churches, community centers, shops, mills, stores ... you name the
place and I have spent time there, listening. In the case of Oscar
Babineaux, I was entertained by a bit of shit-talking, then some jokes,
and then legends with family anecdotes. Where does one reality end and
another begin? It's hard to say.

Let me begin with a simple story, told from the point of view of a young
Babineaux, whose father had been in pain for some time.

One day me and my daddy. My daddy was sick. His stomach kept hurting
him, hurting him. Every night he would lay in the bed cramped up so bad.
Said there was a big old knot in his stomach. He said he just couldn\'t
take it. We had to sit on his legs to stretch him out, stretch his arms
out so that cramp would leave his stomach. So mama said one day ... We
had an old seventy-one Ford pickup truck. With a purple hood. So one day
mama said --- my daddy\'s name was Taise --- she said Taise we going to
bring you to the treater. I was kind of small, so they brought me with
them. And the only thing I can remember, man, is my daddy going in the
house with this old lady. And I was still in the truck, because they
wouldn\'t let me go in the house. So when he come outside, he throwed up
snakes. Out of his stomach. Out of his mouth. I mean six seven eight
nine ten. Throwed them up. And when we left from there, Daddy was fine.
Never caught a cramp again.

Babineaux told me several stories like this, of treaters trying to help
and people also using their powers to hurt. It may or may not be a part
of his day-to-day experience, but it is certainly a part of his
discursive expression, this openness to a variety of realities.
Babineaux is, after all, the devout Catholic who once beckoned two
Mormon missionaries into his living room to talk. He didn't think anyone
was going to change their minds, but he imagined they all might learn
something.

This openness to the world, or at least as he reports it to others
(including me), resulted in him telling me a couple of stories that
involved his family looking for treasure. He prefaced both stories with
"my family was weird" because they liked to dig for money in the belief
that their grandfather had left them money. The first tale he told me
involved a spirit bull scaring everyone off just as they came across
what might be treasure. The spirit bull is a common motif in Louisiana
treasure tales, and so it's appearance did not surprise me. I was not
prepared however for the next story, which began calmly enough but then
took an unexpected twist:

One day we went, and I was at work, so I can see, we at a country spot,
like our property. So I can see a lot of people dressed in white. So I'm
curious me. I said, well shit what the hell is everybody doing out there
dressed in white? I wanna see.

So I goes out there. They tell me you're working right now, just go home
come back. You know, come back after work. So I goes back, man, after
work. They all in the house. We all praying man, everyone's on their
knees praying. They got an excavator in the back yard, digging. Find
this money, I guess.

We're on our knees, man, we're praying. It's like in the pit of the
summer like here. No wind nothing. They had a wind come through the
house. That wind was so strong my aunt was holding onto the door like
that and both her legs was in the air. That's how strong the wind was.
In the house.

So they said\... they picked me, my nephew --- the one I was telling you
that talk all that shit, and my little niece to go bring some water to
the workers in back, the one that was doing the work. So we got to
walking. We passed on the side of the house to bring them.

So my nephew said, say man you see that guy in the tree? I said man fuck
I don't see nobody in no tree. He said yeah man he be right there
sitting on that limb. I said I don't see nobody man. I'm getting scared
now. Man I don't see nobody. But he's seeing this, you know. So he
said--- I said how he look?

It's a guy, he said, it's a guy dressed in a pirate suit, man. He said
he got a pirate hat on. He got a pirate jacket --- and he started
talking to him. The guy in the tree started talking to him while he's
telling me this. But the guy in the tree is tell him shut up don't tell
me that.

So he telling me man look he right there. You can't see him? Look he
right there on that branch. He say he want something more to drink. You
know, because what they had did: they'd put a bowl in the back yard,
under this tree, with some alcohol in it. You understand? And I don't
know if it was the sun that would dissolve it, but it would be gone.
Okay, so he say he say man he want another drink.

So I said fuck man don't tell me that I wanna get back in the house. I
said I don't see nobody up there. So we kept on walking. We went out
there. We brung them some water. So on our way back. Look at him. He
say, see you, you son of a bitch. He say you don't wanna give me another
drink, huh? He say you gonna be just like me. He say you see this here
peg leg? He say you going to be just like me. He say for this out here
y'all are going to have to lose something.

So, man, it got kind of scared. We started walking fast. By the time we
got to the house, I broke out a run. A shovel, man, come from the back
of the house. I mean full force. That shovel stuck in that tree so deep
we had to dig it out with an axe. It stuck\... you know with a shovel,
it's hard to stick a shovel into anything. That shovel went inside the
tree halfway.

We could spend a lot of time marveling over the beauty of this story:
it's use of dialogue to draw us in, the quotidian details like the
evaporating alcohol or how shovels are never as sharp as we might like,
or the careful pacing that sets up two scenes with the repeating motif
of things flying through the air.

But most listeners of this story wonder if it's true, and my initial
answer is always I don't know. More importantly, what do you mean by
what's true? Are you just wondering if the facts of the story itself are
true? To be honest, the story beggars my belief. But such a narrow band
of truth might prove fragile if we begin to wonder why this story
features not only a pirate but a pirate threatening African Americans
with dismemberment. We could extend this a bit, but I will jump to the
deeper history:

By 1817 the privateers of Jean Lafitte and his predecessor, Luis de
Aury, were capturing numerous Spanish slavers off the coast of Cuba. The
pirate\'s barracoons, or slave pens, on Galveston Island were often
swelled beyond capacity, containing a thousand or more African chattels.
Many buyers came to the island to buy slaves at \$1.00 per pound, and
three brothers, John, Rezin, and James Bowie, were among the pirate\'s
best customers. In 1853 John Bowie recorded in \"DeBow\'s Magazine\"
that the brothers, who channeled their illicit slave trade via Black
Bayou on Lake Sabine or via the Calcasieu to Lake Charles, realized a
net profit of \$65,000 in two years time from the sale of 1,500 Africans
in Louisiana.

The deeper history is that enslaved Africans were the treasure: they
were the gold that made the South rich. Seen in this light, Oscar
Babineaux's story is one way for this memory to be kept alive. While its
actions might strike us as strange, one of the ways vernacularization
works is to take larger events and make them personal, dramatizing
history in a way that a story can be told.

# Conclusions

My friend and colleague Henry Glassie once noted that people, living in
the present, create the future out of the past. His was an existential
tautology: all of us have nothing more than the past, which we accrue
present by present, sometimes foolishly wasting those presents on
distractions, consciously or unconsciously. We engage each other in the
present, competing or cooperating for a future to which we have various
levels of control --- sadly, power always matters. We sometimes imagine
that older people live in the past, but that is impossible. What they do
have is a larger sense, a larger presence (if you will), of the past.

What they don't have is illusions about how the past should be
represented. That largely falls on scholars and professionals like us
who, being formally educated, bring those forms to our expectations to
how history should look and how it should work. My goal today has been
to offer a few examples of the different ways people talk about the past
and to draw from those examples a few simple truths along with a few
ideas about how to proceed:

**The Past Is Always Told in the Present**

Context matters. *Create moments*.

**The Past Isn't Always a Sequence of Events**

History is not always a story. *Let people talk*.

**The Past Is Bigger than We Think**

Deeper histories lurk beneath strange surfaces. *Capture everything;
sort later*.

[^1]: One of the more interesting accounts of life stories comes from Charlotte Linde who leaves what counts as a life story fairly wide open: it need not be told in one text, in one setting, or in any one particular manner; the separate pieces need only be about the individual doing the talking: "A life story consists of all the stories and associated discourse units, such as explanations and chronicles, and the connections between them, told by an individual during the course of his/her lifetime that satisfy the following two criteria: (1) The stories and associated discourse units contained in the life story have as their primary evaluation a point about the speaker, not a general point about the way the world is. (2) The stories and associated discourse units have extended reportability; that is, they are tellable and are told and retold over the course of a long period of time" (1993:21).
